# Contractions

(This is Gregor Richards's specific thoughts on contractions in formal writing.
For style thoughts in general, see [the main document](STYLE.md).)

Use contractions anywhere where you would use contractions in formal speech, so
long as it doesn't create ambiguity. Eschewing contractions makes writing
stilted. Some people have the misbegotten opinion that stilted writing is more
formal; the reality is that stilted writing is poor writing, in any context.
Stilted writing suggests that its author's grasp of English is poor.
Contractions are more natural, and natural writing comes across as confident,
not casual. Moreover, contractions often convey a subtly different connotation
than their uncontracted form, so banning contractions restricts expressiveness
to no gain. Note that, for this reason, it's equally daft to demand that
contractions be used anywhere where contraction is possible. Like any word
choice, the choice to use or not use a contraction should be made thoughtfully.

No general style guide has a proscription of contractions. Even Strunk and
White doesn't proscribe contractions—I used to misremember that Strunk and
White was the origin of this proscription, but it's not. The Chicago Manual of
Style itself doesn't mention contractions, but its commentary encourages
contractions. The same is true of MLA. APA doesn't mention contractions; it
doesn't mention much, since it mainly focuses on formatting, but it does
mention some elements of writing style that are particular to academic works,
and contractions are not among them. The Oxford Style Guide doesn't mention
contractions except in describing how to use them. The US's Plain Writing Act
encourages contractions in American legal communication, and legal writing
experts encourage contractions in all legal writing.

After some research (thanks to [English
StackExchange](https://english.stackexchange.com/) user [Stuart
F](https://english.stackexchange.com/users/319429/stuart-f) for nudging me in
the right direction), I have some idea of where the proscription on
contractions might come from. First, English law prior to the 1700's had
developed so-called “Court-Hand”, rife with abbreviations of all sorts, and
this was then outlawed because the resulting laws were “more difficult to read
than Latin records of preceding ages” ([Hendrickson
1971](https://doi.org/10.2307/356528)). Second, Jonathan Swift (or as I call
him, J'ift) vocally abhorred contractions of all kinds, and was possibly
English's first prescriptivist, wishing “that some Method should be thought on
for ascertaining and fixing our Language for ever” ([Bishop
1998](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/153775779.pdf)). Legal writing is not a
wise place to look for rules of writing, as legal writing is nearly universally
acknowledged as inscrutable. And, while Swift is widely known as a great
author, he was not and did not claim to be an expert on grammar, usage, or
etymology, and his justification for his disdain for contractions amounts to
little more than sneering at the lower classes.

How many proscriptions of contractions tell you not to use the word “none”? Not
one of them. Hundreds of words in English are contractions which no one cares
to ban: none, never, neither, altogether, already, alright, albeit, also,
always, and beware, to name ten which predate the advent of the apostrophe;
ampersand, cosine, smog, modem, codec, and pixel, to name six which follow it.
Proscriptions of contractions are ignorant of the very thing they proscribe,
only banning contractions which happen to contain apostrophes. Even if we
rewrite the rule as “don't use contractions that contain apostrophes”, there's
a flaw in that proscription too, since the genitive (possessive) form, “ 's”,
arose as a contraction as well. All apostrophes are contractions, and not all
contractions use apostrophes.

Some contractions are positive, useful advances in language, as they eliminate
ambiguity. The verb “have” typically indicates possession, but is also used as
an auxiliary to introduce the past perfect, as in “I have gone” or, preferably,
“I've gone”. Historically, the contraction was allowed to take either meaning,
but in modern usage, it always indicates the auxiliary: “I've gone” is right,
but “I've two brothers” is wrong. The ambiguity which can arise from these two
forms is actually *eliminated* by using the contraction, making the meaning
clearer. The same is true of “will”, albeit the standard verb is rare: “I'll
go” is right, but “I'll you to go” is meaningless. The same is also true of the
(apostrophe-free) contraction “gonna”, which is only used as the auxiliary to
introduce future tense: “I'm gonna go” is correct in informal speech, but “I'm
gonna the store” is not, eliminating an ambiguity. Of course, “gonna” is
considered slang, and so “common usage is the only valid arbiter of style”
demands its exclusion in formal settings; the point is that contractions are
often *not* lazy, but in fact improve the clarity of language through
disambiguation. Although common speakers don't understand the rules of grammar
in any depth, common people nonetheless settle instinctively on sensible
grammar rules, which is why we have grammar in the first place.

There is one good reason to eliminate contractions from academic writing in
certain circumstances: academic writing is reviewed, and some reviewers are as
puritanical as they are ill-informed. I never use contractions when writing a
grant, for instance. That's an incorrect decision in terms of style, but a
correct decision in terms of appeasing extremists. In my field within CS, this
rule is not, however, enforced by conference or journal reviewers, as evidenced
by the fact that contractions regularly appear in conference and journal
articles.

Incidentally, if you're going to claim that my own rule 2 suggests that you
should avoid contractions because it's common to avoid contractions in formal
writing, refer back to my rule 5.

*“Now repeat offter me the anti-contraction oath: I will not ever use
contractions; I am going to allow not one to pass my lips. I all so will not
write them, and not either will I tolerate them from others, all be it this
will hand in cap any one from under standing my writing.”*

([Return to the main document](STYLE.md))
